applications/conceptual-model-editor/docs/persistence.md, before:

[back to main](./main.md)

# Making your work persistent

You should start in the [Specification manager](https://tool.dataspecer.com/manager) where you create:

-   your own directory (package)
-   in there a visual model
-   open the visual model in CME

Once you are in `dscme` you can play with your models and profiles. To save your work to the dataspecer backend:

-   **once**: click the `💾pkg` button in the central part of app header
-   **once and leave**: click the `💾pkg & 👋` button in the central part of app header
    -   it will take you back to the [Specification manager](https://tool.dataspecer.com/manager)
-   **automatically**: click the `🟢autosave` button in the right part of the app header
    -   it will sync your modeling state to the backend every _15s (based on current configuration)_
    -   you'll get notified that the autosave happened by `...saved 🤞` message in the button

## Take it to your own hands

You can also generate your model to lightweight owl ontology, export your beautiful diagrams or export your current workspace. For more information, refer yourself to [exports section](./exports.md).

Commit message:

dscme - user docs (#520)
* dscme - docs wip
* dscme - docs wip
* dscme - pkg manager on local
* dscme - make the page a little nicer

applications/conceptual-model-editor/docs/persistence.md, after:

[back to main](./main.md)

# Making your work persistent

You should start in the [Specification manager](https://tool.dataspecer.com/manager) where you create:

-   your own directory (package)
-   in there a visual model
-   open the visual model in CME

Once you are in `dscme` you can play with your models and profiles. To save your work to the dataspecer backend:

-   **once**: click the `💾pkg` button in the central part of app header
-   **once and leave**: click the `💾pkg & 👋` button in the central part of app header
    -   it will take you back to the [Specification manager](https://tool.dataspecer.com/manager)
-   **automatically**: click the `🟢autosave` button in the right part of the app header
    -   it will sync your modeling state to the backend every _15s (based on current configuration)_
    -   you'll get notified that the autosave happened by `...saved` message in the button

If you don't want to save your work and just return to the manager, click the `dscme` logo in the top left corner of the app.

## Lightweight ontology

You can also generate your model to lightweight owl ontology, export your beautiful diagrams or export your current workspace. For more information, refer yourself to [exports section](./exports.md).
