applications/client/src/editor/components/add-interpreted-surroundings/wikidata/README.md, before:

# Wikidata Add Interpreted Surroundings Dialog

The Add Interpreted Surroudings dialog used for browsing the Wikidata ontology surroundings.
The entry point is the `wikidata-add-interpreted-surroundings-dialog.tsx` that contains the main exported dialog to be used in the application.

- Root folder structure:
  - `wikidata-ancestors-selector-panel`
    - Contains components for the left side of the surroundings dialog for ancestors selection.
    - Mimics the behaviour of the default ancestor selector panel.
  - `wikidata-properties-panel`
    - Contains components for the right side of the surroundings dialog for property selection.
  - `context`
    - React contexts for using the Wikidata adapter and additional adapter APIs.
  - `helpers`
    - Components and function that can be used in other components freely (e.g. loading circle, error dialog...)
  - `hooks`
    - Hooks for simplified calling of the Wikidata adapter API.
  - `wikidata-entities-detail-dialog`
    - A dialog that shows when clicking `(i)` button on entities.
    - Diaplys detail of the entity.
  - `property-selection-record`
    - Contains records that are stored when user selects a property.
    - When the user confirms selection in the main dialog.
    - The Wikidata properties are transformed into the Dataspecer associations and attributes.

### Overview

Starting from the entrypoint `WikidataAddInterpretedSurroundingsDialog`.
The dialog is provided with a Wikidata class IRI which then starts loading of it's surroundings through the `WikidataAdapter`.
The selected class is refered to as a root class.
When user selects a different ancestor from the ancestor selector panel, the newly selected class is refered to as a selected class.
For each entity a detail dialog can be shown (`WikidataEntityDetailDialog`).

After the loading, the main dialog displays it's two panels: `WikidataAncestorsSelectorPanel` and `WikidataPropertiesPanel`.
The freshly started dialog displays properties for the root class.
When user selects a different ancestor (a selected class), the Wikidata adapter is used to obtain surroundings for the selected class.


- `WikidataAncestorsSelectorPanel` 
  - Displays a simple list of ancestors of the selected root class.
  - Clicking on an ancestors selects the ancestors as a selected class and displays its surroundings in the properties panel.
- `WikidataPropertiesPanel`
  - Displays filtering options and lists containing the properties grouped into accordion based on whether the property is: association, attribute, backward association, and external identifier (an attribute which contains URI to other data source). The separation was done to improve overall performance when displaying thousands of properties.
  - When a user selects a property, it is added to a list of selected properties.
  - The properties can be managed by `WikidataManageSelectedDialog`.
  - The properties can be filtered by the `WikidataFilterByInstanceDialog`.
  - When clicking on a property a `WikidataPropertySelectionDialog` is displayed.
  - `WikidataManageSelectedDialog`
    - Enables a user to edit already selected properties.
    - The selection cannot be the same -> a user cannot select the same property multiple times.
    - See below in *Selecting properties and transformations to the Dataspecer model*.
  - `WikidataFilterByInstanceDialog`
    - Enables to insert a URI of an instance and filter the properties by the properties used on the instance.
    - A warning is displayed when an instance that does not belong the currently selected ancestor tree.
    - Note that the instance must not be a class otherwise it would take too long, so it is diasllowed.
  - `WikidataPropertySelectionDialog`
    - Displays when a user clicks on a property and the property is either association (must select domain/range) or the option to include inherited properties is on.

#### Contexts

The dialog uses three context for easier manipulation.

- React query client
  - A React query client from the `react-query` library that is used for simplified handling of requests to the backend.
  - It is used by the React hooks inside `hooks` folder.
- Wikidata adapter context
  - Contains a `WikidataAdapter` which then enables components to access functions to query the Wikidata ontology API service and the Wikidata SPARQL endpoint.
-  Property selection
   - Contains a list of selected properties.

#### Hooks 

Each backend call is defined as a hook using the Wikidata adapter and the React query client.
The hooks return the basic information about the requests as in `react-query` library.

#### Selecting properties and transformations to the Dataspecer model.

The property selection record defines a property selection which is stored inside Property selection context.
Each property selection is defined by the:
  1.  `WikidataPropertyType` - an association, an attribute, an external identifier attribute, and backwards associatoin.
  2. A property.
  3. A subject class.
  4. An object class (is be empty for attributes).
  
A property can be selected only once based on the above provided definitions.
You must note that the Dataspecer does not provide a way to handle properties with multiple domains and ranges.
Also it does not handle inheritance itself.
When selecting a property which is inherited, the user is prompted to choose an ancestor defining the property.
When selecting the domain/range a user is also prompted to select the range/domain.
The selection is scrict and disallows user to select the same property with the same configuration of type, property, subject, and object.

<br>

When a user is satified by the selection and confirms it.
The properties are transformer to the Dataspecer model (`property-selection-record/transform-selected-surroundings.ts`).
Since the user can select the property multiple times with different configuration.
And because Dataspecer does not allow multiple domains and ranges.
Each selection is defined as a separate Dataspecer attribute/association with IRI describing the selection's definition.

<br>

Main dialogs:
- `WikidataPropertySelectionDialog`
  - Handles selection when an including inherited properties flag is checked or the property is association/backwards association.
  - The dialog steps through selecting a parent and/or domain/range.
  - The filtering by instance is also active here, but can be turned off.
- `WikidataManageSelectedDialog`
  - The dialog can be used to modify selected properties.
  - All the rules mentioned above apply here as well.

#### Filter by instance with `WikidataFilterByInstanceDialog`

The filter by instance dialog enables a user to input an instance IRI and filter properties for the currently selected ancesor.
The filter filters out properties which are not used on the instance.
A warning is displayed when the instance is not part of the currently selected ancestor tree.
A user cannot select an class, otherwise it would mean computing the same statistics as were done in the preprocessing.
Also note that the IRIs might contain some query or #.
It must be cleaned before querying the backend.

#### Entity details with `WikidataEntityDetailDialog`

The entity detail represents detail of a class or a property.
The detail is click-through, meaning when clicking on entities, the a new detail is shown for the clicked entity.
The user can then navigate back with the back button at the bottom.

Commit message:

Fixing sparql queries and moving adapter context and detail to appropriate folders

applications/client/src/editor/components/add-interpreted-surroundings/wikidata/README.md, after:

# Wikidata Add Interpreted Surroundings Dialog

The Add Interpreted Surroudings dialog used for browsing the Wikidata ontology surroundings.
The entry point is the `wikidata-add-interpreted-surroundings-dialog.tsx` that contains the main exported dialog to be used in the application.

- Root folder structure:
  - `wikidata-ancestors-selector-panel`
    - Contains components for the left side of the surroundings dialog for ancestors selection.
    - Mimics the behaviour of the default ancestor selector panel.
  - `wikidata-properties-panel`
    - Contains components for the right side of the surroundings dialog for property selection.
  - `context`
    - React contexts for using the Wikidata adapter and additional adapter APIs.
  - `helpers`
    - Components and function that can be used in other components freely (e.g. loading circle, error dialog...)
  - `hooks`
    - Hooks for simplified calling of the Wikidata adapter API.
  - `wikidata-entities-detail-dialog`
    - A dialog that shows when clicking `(i)` button on entities.
    - Diaplys detail of the entity.
  - `property-selection-record`
    - Contains records that are stored when user selects a property.
    - When the user confirms selection in the main dialog.
    - The Wikidata properties are transformed into the Dataspecer associations and attributes.

### Overview

The most important is the set up of the `WikidataAdapterContext` which then provides the Wikidata adapter to the rest of the components.

Starting from the entrypoint `WikidataAddInterpretedSurroundingsDialog`.
The dialog is provided with a Wikidata class IRI which then starts loading of it's surroundings through the `WikidataAdapter`.
The selected class is refered to as a root class.
When user selects a different ancestor from the ancestor selector panel, the newly selected class is refered to as a selected class.
For each entity a detail dialog can be shown (`WikidataEntityDetailDialog`).

After the loading, the main dialog displays it's two panels: `WikidataAncestorsSelectorPanel` and `WikidataPropertiesPanel`.
The freshly started dialog displays properties for the root class.
When user selects a different ancestor (a selected class), the Wikidata adapter is used to obtain surroundings for the selected class.


- `WikidataAncestorsSelectorPanel` 
  - Displays a simple list of ancestors of the selected root class.
  - Clicking on an ancestors selects the ancestors as a selected class and displays its surroundings in the properties panel.
- `WikidataPropertiesPanel`
  - Displays filtering options and lists containing the properties grouped into accordion based on whether the property is: association, attribute, backward association, and external identifier (an attribute which contains URI to other data source). The separation was done to improve overall performance when displaying thousands of properties.
  - When a user selects a property, it is added to a list of selected properties.
  - The properties can be managed by `WikidataManageSelectedDialog`.
  - The properties can be filtered by the `WikidataFilterByInstanceDialog`.
  - When clicking on a property a `WikidataPropertySelectionDialog` is displayed.
  - `WikidataManageSelectedDialog`
    - Enables a user to edit already selected properties.
    - The selection cannot be the same -> a user cannot select the same property multiple times.
    - See below in *Selecting properties and transformations to the Dataspecer model*.
  - `WikidataFilterByInstanceDialog`
    - Enables to insert a URI of an instance and filter the properties by the properties used on the instance.
    - A warning is displayed when an instance that does not belong the currently selected ancestor tree.
    - Note that the instance must not be a class otherwise it would take too long, so it is diasllowed.
  - `WikidataPropertySelectionDialog`
    - Displays when a user clicks on a property and the property is either association (must select domain/range) or the option to include inherited properties is on.

#### Contexts

The dialog uses three context for easier manipulation.

- React query client
  - A React query client from the `react-query` library that is used for simplified handling of requests to the backend.
  - It is used by the React hooks inside `hooks` folder.
- Wikidata adapter context
  - Contains a `WikidataAdapter` which then enables components to access functions to query the Wikidata ontology API service and the Wikidata SPARQL endpoint.
-  Property selection
   - Contains a list of selected properties.

#### Hooks 

Each backend call is defined as a hook using the Wikidata adapter and the React query client.
The hooks return the basic information about the requests as in `react-query` library.

#### Selecting properties and transformations to the Dataspecer model.

The property selection record defines a property selection which is stored inside Property selection context.
Each property selection is defined by the:
  1.  `WikidataPropertyType` - an association, an attribute, an external identifier attribute, and backwards associatoin.
  2. A property.
  3. A subject class.
  4. An object class (is be empty for attributes).
  
A property can be selected only once based on the above provided definitions.
You must note that the Dataspecer does not provide a way to handle properties with multiple domains and ranges.
Also it does not handle inheritance itself.
When selecting a property which is inherited, the user is prompted to choose an ancestor defining the property.
When selecting the domain/range a user is also prompted to select the range/domain.
The selection is scrict and disallows user to select the same property with the same configuration of type, property, subject, and object.

<br>

When a user is satified by the selection and confirms it.
The properties are transformer to the Dataspecer model (`property-selection-record/transform-selected-surroundings.ts`).
Since the user can select the property multiple times with different configuration.
And because Dataspecer does not allow multiple domains and ranges.
Each selection is defined as a separate Dataspecer attribute/association with IRI describing the selection's definition.

<br>

Main dialogs:
- `WikidataPropertySelectionDialog`
  - Handles selection when an including inherited properties flag is checked or the property is association/backwards association.
  - The dialog steps through selecting a parent and/or domain/range.
  - The filtering by instance is also active here, but can be turned off.
- `WikidataManageSelectedDialog`
  - The dialog can be used to modify selected properties.
  - All the rules mentioned above apply here as well.

#### Filter by instance with `WikidataFilterByInstanceDialog`

The filter by instance dialog enables a user to input an instance IRI and filter properties for the currently selected ancesor.
The filter filters out properties which are not used on the instance.
A warning is displayed when the instance is not part of the currently selected ancestor tree.
A user cannot select an class, otherwise it would mean computing the same statistics as were done in the preprocessing.
Also note that the IRIs might contain some query or #.
It must be cleaned before querying the backend.
